Welcome back to Gary's Economics, today we're
going to talk about Liz Truss's energy plan
okay so we're filming this on thursday
morning the plan has just come out
the plan is to cap energy bills such that the
average household would pay £2,500 a year
and that is going to cost the government
it looks like about £150,000,000,000 and
that's going to be funded from the looks
of it by government spending all right so
i've got some big concerns
about this plan and i think it's
it's really interesting i think we can learn a lot
by talking about it so the first thing to say is
obviously the situation is basically a disaster
and it's absolutely essential that some support
is provided so it's good that support is there
uh the problem is the way that the support is
designed okay so i think the most interesting
thing to comment on here is we are making
basically exactly the same mistake that we
made during Covid with regards to the economy
again so in Covid the government gave out a huge
amount of money and that money basically all
ended up with richer people which meant that by
the end of Covid your average rich person had
accumulated more than a £100,000cash
and i was saying from the beginning of Covid
but if you do this if you allow a huge amount
of money to go from the government to the rich
then afterwards you will get a massive increase
in inequality a massive increase in inflation and
essentially a costly living crisis which we
had um and then we had the cost of living
crisis right so if you haven't yet watched it
i would encourage you to go back and re-watch
the first video on this channel which talks
about how Covid is making the rich richer that
goes through really clearly the simple question of
if the government is giving a huge amount of money
who's going to get it explaining how it's the
rich and then talking about what does it mean
if the rich accumulate a huge amount of cash
because this energy crisis is basically being
dealt with in exactly the same way which is the
government is giving a huge amount of money out
and obviously people are happy because that's
supporting their energy bills but the money
ends up with richer people so the end result will
be a massive increase in inequality so inCovid
they gave out by the end £600,000,000,000
which was about £13,000 for everyadult
in the country that all went to the richand here
they're giving out another £150,000,000,000
pounds which is another about £4,000 for
every adult in the country and that again in
this case is going basically directly to Energy
Companies and it's really important to realise
when money goes out and it goes to Energy
Companies the money doesn't disappear that
will be held by the Energy Companies it will be
paid out as dividends to shareholders of Energy
Companies which are richer people and what we'll
see here is another massive accumulation of cash
to richer people um now i've been saying from the
beginning of Covid if you allow rich people to
accumulate cash that will push prices up and now
we've seen a situation where that has happened
prices have gone up and we're responding by giving
the rich another massive chunk of cash and i think
there's a real danger here that we start to get
into a cycle of we have a crisis we give the rich
a ton of money and it truly was a huge amount
of money that we gave them during Covid that
understandably pushes up prices and pushes
down living conditions for ordinary families
and then we respond by giving the rich another ton
of money which will probably push prices up again
which will mean we'll have to respond
again by giving the rich a ton of money
it's a really dangerous cycle and you know
if anyone is a student of economic history
they will be aware that this has
happened before in the downfall of
most big historical empires they've reached a
point at the end where rather than funding the
things they need through taxation especially
of the richer people who can afford it
they start to basically print money and borrow
from the rich and try to fund things that way
and it can get into a bad spiral of you borrow
from the rich you give the money back to the rich
they get richer you can't afford the things you
need so you borrow from the rich again and i think
this could be really a dangerous space um and i'm
worried to be honest if we keep trying to run the
economy this way where we pretend we can have
the things we need without ever taxing the rich
who increasingly own everything then the rich
will get richer and richer and richer and the
rest of us will get we get poorer and poorer
and poorer and you will see this progressive
falling in living conditions so you know i would
really encourage you to think about what it means
when an economic policy results
in a massive massive cash windfall
for the rich um what that means for you
what that means for our society because
increasingly it seems like we're going to run
our economy this way um yeah think about that um
but most of all you understand that £150 billion
it's not going to disappear it's going to go to
the energy companies and then it's going to go
to wealthy individuals and they will use that money
to push up prices to buy the houses that your
kids need you know they'll give it to their kids
they'll buy houses ultimately it's going to cause
inequality to increase even more and that's going
to have really damaging effects in the economy
okay so that's the first point which is that
this is going to lead to a massive increase in
equality um and a massive accumulation of cash
by the rich just like Covid did the second point
is and i think this is a really interesting one
doesn't actually really solve the energy
crisis the reason for that is this okay
there is less energy in Europe now
than there was two-three years ago
because Russia is reducing the amount of energy
it's exporting to Europe if there's less energy
that means somebody has to use less energy this is
like a physical fact there's less energy somebody
has to use less so that raises the question of
who is going to reduce their energy consumption so
normally when there's less energy what will happen
in the capitalist free market economy is the price
goes up and then what you'll see is poorer and
ordinary people will have to reduce their energy
consumption and that's not a good way to deal
with things because in many cases that means
not turning your heat on in the winter so in the
absence of any intervention what you would see
is a massive decrease of energy usage by ordinary
families by poorer people which would be terrible
you know cold homes people get sick people will
die that's what would happen so definitely you
need some intervention but somebody has to reduce
their energy consumption right so what a sensible
government would be doing would be looking at
the country and saying well where can we healthily
reduce our energy consumption in what areas are
we using more energy than we need how do we reduce
these kinds of non-necessary energy consumption so
that ordinary families can keep the heating on now
i want you to ask yourself a question under this
plan where the government is capping bills for
everyone including the very rich who is going
to reduce their energy consumption, who?
if the prices are not going up beyond a certain point
who's going to reduce the energy consumption?
well we know that prices are still increasing
significantly versus last year we know also that
the average rich individual has accumulated
£100,000-200,000 cash over the last 2 years
their bills are being capped are the richgoing
to reduce their energy consumption here?
why would they? they're richer than they've
ever been they're having their bills capped
they are not going to reduce their energy
consumption right so if you have a situation
where we have less energy and we know the rich
are not going to reduce their energy consumption
then still it will have to be poorer and ordinary
families that have to reduce their energy
consumption so i honestly don't think this plan
is going to successfully save ordinary families
from being in cold homes this winter because the
energy is not there the rich are not going to
reduce their consumption which means ordinary
families will still have to reduce their
consumption i think what this shows us is that our
government is taking a phenomenally naive approach
to an energy crisis which is we have less
energy but the government rather than trying
to manage a reduction in usage of energy is
just giving out money, but money is not energy!
if there's less energy you need to manage it
so that the people have the most excessive
energy consumption reduce their energy usage
that is the only way to save ordinary families
and we're doing nothing to do that nothing to do
that which means rich people will not reduce the
energy consumption which means ultimately families
will still go cold you know if there's not enough
energy you need to manage it so that the rich
reduce the energy consumption that is not going
to happen and i think what this highlights
more than anything is that our government
and in many cases our economists are continuing to
be naive about the importance of distribution and
never could it be more obvious than here look
there's a limited amount of energy available
if we do not save that energy for the people
and families that need it then they will not
get enough and you need to have a policy which
actively focuses on reducing energy consumption
of the rich and supports the poor and it's not
there so my main concern is that unfortunately
it's not going to work um the rich will not reduce
their energy consumption because they're having
their bills paid by the government and by the
taxpayer which means there won't be enough energy
um the price of energy will go through the roof
because the rich are not reducing their usage and
there's not enough to go around which means the
government will be paying an enormous amount of
money directly to the energy companies who are
themselves owned by the rich which means the rich
will make an enormous profit um and ordinary
families will see their homes go cold so um
i know that's not a positive message but it's
important to realise it doesn't have to be this
way right the total costing of this package is
£150,000,000,000 that's estimated this moment
if you look at The Times top 250 rich list
you'll see that in the first 12 months ofCovid
those 250 individuals increased the wealth
by £106,000,000,000 so this could be paid for
almost entirely just by taxing 1 year of excess
profits of just 250 individuals in the country
um if you broaden it and look at the amount of
money that the rich as a whole have made in the
last three years that is £600,000,000,000 we
know that because the government's giving it out
so somebody must have it and it is the rich who
have it if we were to take that money back we
could give every single adult in the country
£13,000 each without borrowing anything
and this crisis would be over so i think
realistically there are alternatives but
only if we start accepting that what we have
here is fundamentally a distributional crisis
and that we need to be managing the wasteful
energy usage of the rich and the very rich
and that that is the only way to save poor and
ordinary families um so i'm sorry that's not a
positive message but um people need to know what's
going to happen um and yeah good luck thank you